JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour"
tonight: President
Trump suggests Congress
repeal Obamacare even if
they cannot craft a replacement.
We talk with Senator Roy Blunt
of Missouri about Republicans'
push to salvage their bill.
Then: a new approach to policing
in one of the country's most
violent cities by getting
officers out of their cars
and engaged with the community
in Camden, New Jersey.
SCOTT THOMSON, Camden, New
Jersey, Police Chief: We saw,
almost instantaneously, a change
in the atmosphere
within neighborhoods.
That's what people wanted
from us, and it has helped us
significantly, and for us to
provide better policing
services to them as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
From health care reform
to controversial tweets,
Mark Shields and David
Brooks analyze the
weeks news.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senate
Republicans have begun
the Fourth of July recess
with President Trump
urging them to get rid of
Obamacare, even if they
can't replace it yet.
In a tweet this morning, he
said: "If Republican senators
are unable to pass what they are
working on now, they should
immediately repeal, and then
replace at a later date."
The White House said later
that it is still - - quote --
"fully committed" to getting a
bill through the Senate.
The president's feud with cable
news hosts Mika Brzezinski
and Joe Scarborough escalated
today.
Mr. Trump drew widespread
condemnation yesterday
for crudely criticizing
Brzezinski's appearance
and intelligence.
Today, the "Morning Joe" team
on MSNBC charged the White
House had threatened them with a
tabloid expose last spring.
JOE SCARBOROUGH, MSNBC: We got
a call that, hey, The National
Enquirer is going to run
a negative story
against you guys.
And it was, you know --
Donald is friends with -- the
president's friends with the guy
that runs The National Enquirer.
And they said, if you
call the president up,
and you apologize for
your coverage, then
he will pick up the phone and
basically spike the story.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
National Enquirer said
that it was unaware of
any discussions involving
the White House and the
"Morning Joe" hosts.
The president answered
Scarborough's allegation
another tweet.
He said -- quote -- "Fake news.
He called me to stop a
National Enquirer article.
I said no."
A scaled-back version of
President Trump's travel ban
is now in force, affecting six
mostly Muslim nations
and refugees in general.
It took effect late Thursday.
There were scattered protests
in Los Angeles and other
cities, but none of the airport
chaos that had greeted the
original order in January.
Meanwhile, Hawaii asked
a federal judge to
expand the list of those
eligible beyond immediate
family members of those
already in the U.S.
China lodged a public protest
today over U.S. plans to sell
$1.4 billion in arms to Taiwan.
The Foreign Ministry said
that the move runs counter to
President Trump's commitment to
the one-China policy.
Beijing considers Taiwan
to be a renegade province.
Separately, Chinese President
Xi Jinping was in Hong Kong
to mark the 20th anniversary
of the city's
handover from Britain.
He greeted thousands of Chinese
troops at an army garrison,
a display aimed at groups
calling for Hong
Kong's independence.
Xi made clear that
China is not letting go.
XI JINPING, Chinese President
(through translator):
After 20 years of Hong
Kong's return to the
motherland, the practice of
one country, two systems has
gained universally acknowledged
success.
Of course, we have encountered
some new situations,
new problems and new
challenges in the practice.
It is not horrible
to have problems.
The point is to figure out
some ways to solve them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Chinese
Foreign Ministry also
caused a stir, dismissing
the 1997 agreement
with Britain.
A spokesman said it --
quote -- "no longer has any
practical significance."
There is word that the
flow of refugees out
of Syria has reversed.
The U.N. Refugee Agency
reports nearly half-a-million
Syrians have returned
to their homes this
year.
Most have returned to areas
where government forces have
regained control after years of
fighting.
Back in this country, a gunman
opened fire at a hospital in
New York City, killing one
doctor and seriously
wounding several others,
before taking his own life.
Police said the shooter was also
a doctor who had once worked
at the Bronx Lebanon Hospital.
Emergency crews and
heavily armed police
descended on the scene.
Officials said it was an
isolated incident, and
not an act of terror.
Local and federal authorities
in Chicago unveiled new efforts
today to cut the flow of illegal
guns, including adding
more federal agents.
The announcement came as
President Trump tweeted
that crime and killings
in Chicago have reached
epidemic proportions.
Officials in the city
said there's actually
been some improvement,
but they also welcomed
the federal help.
JOEL LEVIN, U.S. Attorney:
Significant progress is being
made in the effort to combat the
violence in Chicago, but the
level of violence continues at
an unacceptable level, and it
is a battle which can only be
fought with all hands on deck.
That is state, federal,
and local law enforcement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As of Sunday,
there have been more than
1,300 shootings in Chicago this
year.
That's down from nearly 1,600
at the same point last year.
Firefighting crews are making
progress against a wildfire that
threatened to engulf an Arizona
town.
Officials reopened a
major roadway in Prescott
Valley today, north of
Phoenix, and hundreds
of people were allowed
back into their homes.
A few thousand others
are still in shelters.
On Wall Street today, the Dow
Jones industrial average gained
62 points to close at 21349.
The Nasdaq fell about
four points, and the
S&P 500 added three.
Both the Dow and the S&P
were up 8 percent for the
first half of the year.
That is the Dow's best
showing since 2013.
The Nasdaq rose 14 percent,
its best since 2009.
And on a lighter note,
Crayola is asking for help
naming a new shade of blue.
Out of 90,000 submissions, the
top five contenders are, dreams
come blue, star-spangled blue,
blue moon bliss, reach
for the stars, my
favorite, and blue-tiful.
You can vote on Crayola's
Web site starting tomorrow
through August 31.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Senator Roy Blunt joins us
to talk health care wrangling
on the hill; rebuilding a
police force in one of America's
most violent cities; President
Trump meets with South Korea's
president; and much more.
Now to the ongoing struggle
to craft a health care reform
bill in the U.S. Senate.
Republican lawmakers
are scrambling to draft
a new version of their
bill before leaving
Washington for the
July fourth recess.
A short time ago, I spoke with
Senator Roy Blunt of Missouri,
who is vice chair of the
Senate Republican Conference.
I begin by asking where
the efforts to find
compromise stand right now.
SEN.
ROY BLUNT (R), Missouri: I think
it's challenging and challenged.
We will see what happens, but
this is a difficult topic that
touches every American family.
And the more members of the
Senate and the House both know
about it, I think the harder
it is to reach that conclusion
you would like to get to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
there are reports, as
you know, news reports
that the majority leader,
Mitch McConnell, is trying to
come up with accommodations
to appeal to both sides of
this argument, to
moderate Republicans.
One of the stories is that
he's considering keeping the
tax on high-income individuals
in order to pay for more of
the gaps in Medicaid coverage.
And, by the way, the
Congressional Budget Office is
saying the cuts to Medicaid are
going to be much deeper than
thought in the future years.
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Well, I think what
they're saying is, in the
second 10 years, you have even
more substantial savings.
Now, remember, there
are no cuts to Medicaid.
Every year in Medicaid, you
spend more money than you spent
the year before under this
plan, but the growth is not
as great as it would be if you
continued to pay, for instance,
100 percent for single
able-bodied adults.
We have got a plan where the
states were told, OK, we will
pay 100 percent for able-bodied
single adults, but we're only
going to pay an average of 52
percent for mothers and their
young children.
Now, there is something
wrong with the way that
system is put together.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But
keeping that tax on
higher-income individuals,
is that being looked at?
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: I think it is.
I think everything is being
looked at, both on the revenue
side and on the expenditure
side and trying to reach that
point where 50 Republicans,
that might include the vice
president being one of the 50,
is -- are being added to that
50 is what it takes to get this
done.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of
the other things we're
seeing, a potential
way of appealing to the
moderates, adding $45 billion or
so for opioid abuse treatment.
Is that something else
that's on the table?
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: It's a problem that
Congress has really taken on
in the last couple of years.
I started sharing the
committee that appropriates
money for health and
human services two years
ago.
We tripled that year the
money that was being - -
to be spent on opioids.
Legislation sort
of followed that.
Then we doubled that tripling.
I think, at some point, there's
a limit to how many times we
can multiply that in a short
period of time, but
this is a real problem.
In Missouri, more people
die from drug overdoses
than car accidents.
If you're a first-responder
in Missouri as part of a fire
department, you're three times
more likely to respond to a drug
overdose than you are a fire.
So it's a problem.
I don't know exactly what the
right number is, but certainly
I think members of the Senate
and House are rightly
concerned about it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to appeal
to conservatives, we're reading
that the majority leader is
giving more options for coverage
plans, allowing people, in
other words, to have a choice of
some less costly, cheaper
plans, in effect, that would
provide less coverage, but would
give them more choices.
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Give
them more choices.
It might also provide some
more up-front coverage.
I think one of the lessons we
should have learned from what's
happened with the current
plan is that there is insurance
coverage, but there is not
really, many times, access
to health care.
If you have these high
deductibles, there is every --
there is a disincentive to get
the policy, because you would
have to pay another -- I think
the average of deductible
policies on the individual
market is $6,000 per individual
before the insurance really
kicked in, and if two of
you got sick, $12,000.
Makes it hard to make that
decision, particularly
when you think what
your family needs is the
first $1,000 that covers the
kids getting sick with the
flu or something like that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you
think the chances are now that
you're going to be able to come
up with something that passes?
And I ask this because President
Trump tweeted this morning, he
said, "If Republican senators
are unable to pass what they
are working on now, they should
immediately repeal and then
replace at a later date."
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Well, it's pretty
late to come up with a new plan.
The hypotheticals are never
legislatively what you
want to be talking about.
You want to be talking
about what you're
focused on at the time.
I think it's fair to say that
it's hard to get 50 senators
out of 52 to vote for a package
this complicated.
Actually, Judy, the more that
members know about this, in
many ways, the harder it is
to make that final decision,
because you have got so much
information, and you know how
many other things are impacted
here by one decision here
that, five decisions later,
has made a big difference
in somebody's life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if you
can't get it passed in July,
do you just set it aside?
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Well, I think we have
had a three-step plan in mind.
We pass this bill that did as
much as we could to kind of
clear the way for Democrats and
Republicans to work
together later.
The secretary of health and
human services would look at
the 1,400-plus rules that the
law gave that person the
ability to define and see how
those could be better defined,
so they were better for
families, better for
access and then, when
that's done, get down
to the real work of Republicans
and Democrats working together
to do things you can do outside
the budget restraints
of the way we're trying
to do this first step.
And if the first step doesn't
work, then you just go to, I
guess, a two-step process, and
it will take longer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Where
you do finally work with
Democrats, Democrats and
Republicans together?
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last thing...
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: And that's
going to happen.
That has to happen to expand
the way more people can get
more insurance in groups, to
look at things like more
transparency from providers.
That eventually has to happen.
But it doesn't have to
happen to stabilize the
moment we're in right now.
The insurance markets,
the individual markets
are collapsing.
A third of the counties
in America now only
have one company that's
willing to offer an
insurance product
on the exchange.
The estimate for next year is
over 40 percent of the counties.
And if you only have would
be choice, you really
don't have any choice.
You either buy that policy or
pay the penalty, and all those
things will happen if we don't
change the current law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last thing I want
to ask you about, Senator Blunt,
and that is the president's
tweets.
A lot of attention has been
diverted in the last few
days to the president's
tweets criticizing
cable news hosts Joe
Scarborough, Mike
Brzezinski, in her case in
very harsh personal terms.
What's your reaction?
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Well, there's no
doubt that cable news hosts can
say things that the president
of the United States
shouldn't say, and people
can be harsh at you.
That doesn't mean you
benefit by being harsh back.
I think, generally,
the president's tweets
are not helpful to him.
At the same time, he's figured
out a way to communicate with
people in ways that no other
president has, or he
wouldn't be president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do those
tweets help his agenda
and the Republican agenda?
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: They sometimes they
do and they sometimes don't.
I think there needs to be
a much more significant
filter on those tweets.
It's OK to have some unspoken
and untweeted thoughts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Roy
Blunt of Missouri, thank you
very much for joining us.
SEN.
ROY BLUNT: Nice to be with you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to
President Trump's repeated
and unsubstantiated
claim that three to five
million votes were cast
illegally in the 2016 election.
He set up a special
commission to investigate,
but one of its first acts
has drawn condemnation
from across the country.
Hari Sreenivasan
is here with that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yesterday, the
vice chair of that commission
sent a letter to all 50
states asking for voter data
that includes addresses,
party I.D., voter history, and
Social Security information.
The commission asked that data
be sent to the White House
by mid-July, but didn't say
how it would be used,
other than to examine for
vulnerabilities in the system.
We take a closer look
now with Rick Hasen.
He is a law professor
at the University of
California, Irvine.
He writes the Election Law blog.
Rick, the "NewsHour"'s
been reaching out to
states all day long.
And we have got nine definite
no's, 18 that might comply in
whole or in part, and a few
other states that are
still looking at it.
Often, what we hear there is
that there are apparently laws
on the books in certain states
that prohibit, even if it's
public information, who can look
at the information and why it
can be looked at.
Explain.
RICK HASEN, University of
California, Irvine: Well, some
of this information, depending
on the state, is
available publicly.
People can buy it.
Some of this is not available.
And, in fact, just before we
came on, I saw a story that Kris
Kobach himself, the personal
who has asked for this
information, he himself
cannot produce the
Social Security numbers
that he has demanded because
that would violate the law
in the state of Kansas.
This doesn't seem to have
been very well thought out.
Not only do we not know what
the information is going
to be used exactly to do.
It doesn't appear that this
information even legally can be
provided by a lot of the states.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, Kris
Kobach, as his role as secretary
of state of Kansas, can't
provide the information
that he's asking for, right?
RICK HASEN: To himself.
That's right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Got it.
Right.
All right, what about the
scope of the investigation?
There seems to be a lot of
focus on measuring or protecting
the integrity one person, one
vote.
I don't see any description in
here about any Russian meddling
that might have happened.
RICK HASEN: Well, so it's
not clear exactly what this
commission is going to do.
Initially, the president said
he wanted to look into the
potential for voter fraud.
There are a couple of Democrats
on the commission who said that
they wanted to look into Russian
meddling.
Kobach said he might be open
to that, but that wasn't on
the list of questions that
was sent to various
state election officials.
It's not clear what this
group is going to do, what
it's going to produce.
But I'm concerned that
it's going to be something
that is just going to try
to support the president's
agenda, claiming that there's
a lot of voter fraud, and use
that to make it harder for
people to be able
to register to vote.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is this
the kind of information
that a campaign really
would pay money for?
RICK HASEN: Well, in some
states, campaigns do pay money
for this kind of information.
The fact that the
information is going to
sent to the president's
office is concerning.
Rather than having
outside professional staff
or rather than having
social scientists who
study this information, we know
that this information is going
literally to the executive
office of the president.
We don't know how
it's going to be kept.
We don't know how secure
it's going to be, on
what kind of servers.
We don't have any information.
But the concerns about privacy,
about identity theft, about
the information being used for
political purposes, I think
these are all legitimate
questions to be asked.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, finally,
is there a question here on the
role of the federal government?
There seemed to be some pushback
from states when it came to
the Department of Homeland
Security going out to them,
saying we have this potential
for hacking, we would like
to help you secure
your networks.
RICK HASEN: Absolutely.
There has been this long
tradition, especially on
the Republican side, of
talking about federalism
and states' rights in this area.
And we're even seeing some
pushback now from states like
Mississippi that are saying they
are not going to cooperate
with providing this information
to the federal government.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All
right, Rick Hasen, a
professor at University
of California, Irvine,
thanks so much.
RICK HASEN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields and David Brooks
take on the week's news;
and the dangers of
relying on statistics
and numbers in medicine.
But first: President
Trump hosted South Korea's
new president at the
White House today, the
first meeting between the two
leaders, who are looking for
a common approach to dealing
with North Korea.
William Brangham has that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: President
Moon Jae-in arrived at the White
House with tensions over North
Korea still running high.
In the Rose Garden, President
Trump pressed again for ending
the North's nuclear and weapons
programs.
DONALD TRUMP, President
of the United States:
The era of strategic
patience with the North
Korean regime has failed.
Many years, and it's failed.
And, frankly, that
patience is over.
We're working closely with
South Korea and Japan as well
as partners around the world
on a range of diplomatic
security and economic
measures to protect
our allies and our own
citizens from this menace
known as North Korea.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: North
Korea, led by Kim Jong-un, has
already test-launched more than
a dozen missiles this
year, all in defiance of
international sanctions.
South Korea President Moon has
long advocated for diplomatic
engagement with Pyongyang.
And since taking office just
last month, he's delayed full
deployment of the U.S. THAAD
anti-missile defense
system in his country.
Today, though, he warned
of a stern response
to any provocations.
MOON JAE-IN, South Korean
President (through translator):
The North Korean nuclear issue
must be resolved, without fail.
I also urge Pyongyang
to promptly return to
the negotiating table
for denuclearization
of the Korean Peninsula.
President Trump and I
will employ both sanctions
and dialogue in a
phased and comprehensive
approach.
And based on this, we both
pledged to seek a fundamental
resolution of the North Korean
nuclear problem.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Meanwhile,
the U.S. has sought China's
help in trying to rein in North
Korea.
However, yesterday, the
administration announced
sanctions against Chinese
companies and individuals
over their alleged illicit
dealings with North Korea.
But U.S. officials insisted
they weren't targeting
the Chinese government.
Today, neither President
Trump nor President
Moon mentioned China.
On a different subject,
Mr. Trump again criticized
the U.S. trade deficit
with South Korea, and
blamed a 2011 free trade
deal for the imbalance.
He called for new action
to reduce trade barriers
between the two countries.
For his part, Moon played
down the trade issue.
And he announced that the
president and Mrs. Trump have
accepted his invitation to visit
South Korea later this year.
So, where do things
stand between the U.S.
and South Korea, and
how will the two nations
deal with the North?
For that, we turn
to Robert Gallucci.
He was the chief U.S. negotiator
back in 1994 when the Clinton
administration persuaded
the North Koreans to dismantle
their plutonium-based
nuclear program in exchange
for economic benefits.
He is now a professor
at Georgetown University
and chair of the U.S.
Korea Institute at Johns
Hopkins University.
Welcome to the "NewsHour."
ROBERT GALLUCCI, Georgetown
University: Thanks very much.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Do you think
today's meeting between Moon and
Trump will help forge a clearer
plan for how to deal
with North Korea?
ROBERT GALLUCCI: I think today's
meeting is a success, in the
sense that the United States
end and the South Koreans
clearly indicated that they
value the alliance very much and
the alliance is important
to the security of both our
countries and the stability of
Northeast Asia.
The way you framed that
question, that it's
going to lead to the
resolution of the issue
with North Korea, is a
bit of a reach from at
least what I could take
away from the meeting.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You
and several other former
Cabinet officials and
senators wrote a letter
to the Trump administration
where you urged that they take
direct immediate talks with
the North Koreans, possibly
send a high-ranking
envoy to North Korea,.
Why do you think
that's a good idea?
ROBERT GALLUCCI: For
a variety of reasons.
I think that people who favor
negotiations do so partly
because the alternatives are
miserable.
There are fundamentally
three options in dealing
with North Korea, and
there always have been
since the end of the Korean War.
One is to contain
the North Koreans.
And we have been doing that,
and we have done it for decades.
And we have been doing that
actually for the eight years
of the Obama administration.
I would say that was a
containment or strategic
patience type of policy.
The problem with containment is
that it doesn't stop with North
Koreans from developing assets
and capabilities and threat that
we would rather they not have.
So, a second option is to
negotiate and to see whether we
cannot reach an agreement with
the North Koreans where they
agree to give up a capability
which we believe they shouldn't
have and is threatening
to friends and allies.
That is what we attempted
to do in 1994 with
the agreed framework.
A third option is to use
military force, something
which we are proud
always to say is on the
table, something
we haven't done.
And, by that, we do not mean
launching another Korean War.
We mean the use of military
force in some limited way
to attack the capability.
Right now, it's not only the
nuclear weapons, but it's those
long-range, ICBM-range ballistic
missiles.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In your
letter, though, you're
clearly arguing for
point two negotiation.
And there are some people, as
you well know, in the foreign
policy establishment who say
you cannot negotiate
with the North Koreans.
And I'm just curious
how you respond to that.
ROBERT GALLUCCI: I think
it's a fair thing to
say that negotiations
with the North Koreans
are not guaranteed to succeed.
And, certainly, through
the years of the Bush
administration, Bush
43, the 2000s, there
were many efforts by
very capable people to
negotiate with the North
Koreans, and it didn't
produce very much.
And even the agreement
which stuck for eight
years, the agreed framework
I mentioned before,
stuck for a while and stopped
the plutonium program from
producing nuclear weapons.
Ultimately, it
collapsed as well.
So, there is reason to say that
negotiations with the North
Koreans are not easy, they
may not succeed, but they may
be a way of getting to where
we want to get to, limiting
the capability of the North
Koreans to do harm to us and
our allies without the use
of military force and
without the risk of a major
war in Northeast Asia.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Chinese
have floated another possible
entreaty to the North Koreans,
and that's for the U.S. and
the South Koreans to stop these
annual military exercises.
How important is that to
the North Koreans and do you
think that that's a good idea?
ROBERT GALLUCCI: The North
Koreans have said frequently
that they are very unhappy about
the U.S.-ROK military exercises.
And I do believe they
are unhappy about them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You actually
had some recent meetings with
North Korean officials and you
heard this very same issue.
ROBERT GALLUCCI: It was the
first thing on their agenda
that they were most concerned
about.
What's interesting about that,
of course, is that, from our
perspective, the alliance
between the United States and
Republic of Korea is key to
both our countries' security,
and a manifestation of the
strength of that alliance
are those military exercises.
So that will be not high on
our agenda to give up easily.
Is that something that might
be on the table, along with
the nuclear weapons program of
the North Koreans?
Plausibly.
But that's pretty
much down the road.
I wouldn't imagine
negotiations would begin there.
They would begin with
talks about talks, I think,
without preconditions.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Last night.
Do you think the Trump
administration has any
interest in any of the
things you're taking
about?
ROBERT GALLUCCI: I don't
know what the Trump
administration is interested in.
There have been mentions by the
secretary of state, secretary
of defense and even the
president of possibly talking
with the North Koreans.
I worry that, in their minds,
are preconditions that will make
negotiations someplace between
difficult and impossible.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Robert
Gallucci, Georgetown University,
thank you very much for being
here.
ROBERT GALLUCCI:
Thank you very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: a
look at how one police
force is rethinking
the way its officers do
their job.
In the aftermath of a succession
of deadly police shootings,
law enforcement officials
across the country have grappled
with how police officers
might better interact with
the public.
In Camden, New Jersey,
new procedures meant
to bring officers into
closer face-to-face
contact with the people
they serve seem to be
having a positive effect.
Hari recently traveled to
Camden, and has this report.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Officer
Vidal Rivera is a native son
of Camden, New Jersey, a street
cop who can see the
blocks he patrols through
eyes that grew up here.
VIDAL RIVERA, Camden Police
Department: Out here,
it was like a market,
like a flea market.
You could go to any corner
and get whatever you need, or
whatever they were looking for.
They was coming
out to buy drugs.
HARI SREENIVASAN: He's referring
to customers from Philadelphia
who came across the Delaware
River to buy drugs.
They still come in,
but in smaller numbers.
By day, Rivera is
police, by night, a young
professional boxer.
But he says, as a
boy, his mother didn't
let him play outside.
VIDAL RIVERA: It was
just too dangerous.
There was just
too much going on.
She feared that something could
happen, someone high, driving
a car, a shoot-out, everything.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rivera is part
of a revamped force, rebuilt
more or less from the ground
up in 2014.
The faces in the squad room
during morning roll call are
notably young, new officers
recruited to replace an
ineffective department.
VIDAL RIVERA: I remember
being a kid that, something
happened, you weren't allowed to
say nothing to the police.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You weren't
allowed to tell the police
because you didn't trust them?
VIDAL RIVERA: You
didn't trust them.
It was the fear that you had.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Historically,
one of the country's most
impoverished and violent cities,
Camden is home to some 77,000
people, nearly all of them
Latino and African-American.
And a number of the department's
newer officers have been
recruited from the community.
Police Chief Scott Thomson
also grew up in Camden, and he
has been largely responsible
for the reforms.
His entire career has
been with the Camden P.D.
He ordered his officers to leave
their cars, patrol neighborhoods
on foot, knock on doors,
look in on shopkeepers, get
to know and become known
to the people they served.
SCOTT THOMSON, Camden, New
Jersey, Police Chief: We saw,
almost instantaneously, a change
in the atmosphere
within neighborhoods.
That's what people wanted
from us, and it has helped us
significantly, and for us to
provide better policing
services to them as well.
One, we have greater lines of
communication now, which has
given us a tremendous ability
to not only solve crime,
but prevent crime from
occurring in the first place.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
statistics back that up.
Since transitioning from the
old force to the new in 2014,
the number of murders dropped
by almost 70 percent,
burglaries by 27 percent,
robberies 33 percent,
and even an eye-catching
143 percent spike in rapes that
the department attributes to
increased reporting, as well
as new broader federal
guidelines on what
constitutes rape.
Overall, the city's
crime numbers are the
lowest in decades.
Those are impressive statistics
for any police department, and
residents don't dispute them.
But some say seeing them
in a report vs. feeling
the difference every
day are two different
things.
MAN: I see prostitutes
on my street.
I see drug transactions
on my street, in broad
daylight, every day.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This local
business owner was one of
several people who asked not to
be identified, citing
concerns that his remarks
could complicate relations
with local police
officers he knows.
The crimes, he suspects, are
visible to police as well.
MAN: Those must be caught on
camera, but I can't tell that
it makes a lot of difference
in how much of it or
little of it is happening.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Surveillance
cameras are a major piece
of Chief Thomson's formula.
Some 200 of them are
deployed throughout the city.
The chief showed us the
Central command Center.
On these screens are the
real-time video feeds
from every camera, the
location of every officer
on patrol.
There are also gunshot-detecting
microphones placed at certain
locations, meaning police
know the location of the shots
to within a few meters seconds
after it happens, and can
begin responding before
anyone even calls 911.
Still, not everyone is won over.
A Camden resident sees both
the opportunities and costs
of increased surveillance.
MAN: I feel it's a violation
of civil rights, on some level,
with the cameras, because now
you're unknowingly filming
people who didn't give you
permission to film them.
But I have also been on the side
where family members has lost
other family members to violence
and the cameras had assisted
in the apprehension of the
person who committed the crime.
MAN: If the police department
came to me and said, you're
going to have to give up all
your privacy, but we're going
to reduce crime, then make you
a little bit safer, I would
probably say no.
Nobody came to me
and asked me that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is there
a concern that people could
feel like their civil rights
are being violated?
MAN: We don't have any secret
cameras stored away in the city.
Everything is overt.
They're up there on a pole.
They're not hidden.
And we're sensitive to the fact
that there's people that may
not necessarily want the camera
there.
But what we have found is the
majority of people do want them.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
Another major focus of
reform is de-escalation,
training officers to use
force only as a last resort,
a tactic that played out
dramatically in this video shot
two years ago.
A man was wielding a knife at a
restaurant, then began walking
down the street brandishing
the weapon.
Rather than taking him down,
police formed a containment
bubble around him, then followed
him for blocks until
he could be disarmed.
That restraint and patience
earned praise from the chief.
SCOTT THOMSON: We're
handling them exactly
the way that we want to.
And at the end of the day,
you know, what's happening is,
more people are being returned
to their family.
And every time that an
officer pulls the trigger,
it's life-altering for them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: His
department's records show
that, since 2014, the
frequency of officers
using force has
dropped by 24 percent.
And citizen complaints
of police using excessive
force are down 49 percent.
But do these methods put an
officer's own life at risk?
MAN: Sir, drop the knife,
or I will Tase you.
SCOTT THOMSON: What we're
telling officers to do is slow
it down, is -- that which we're
training officers to do is
actually safer for the officers,
when, historically, officers
have been rushing into
situations because
that's the training we
provide, and it's been
dangerous for them, and often
leaving them with the only
option that's left is deadly
force.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's
counter to the more
militarized approaches
taken by other cities.
What's the hardest part
about changing culture?
SCOTT THOMSON: So, for
us, it was that transition
from warrior to guardian.
You still have to have
the warrior mentality and
the ability to trigger
that warrior element
when the time calls for it.
However, that shouldn't
be your operating premise.
That should be the anomaly.
Right?
That should be the
exception, not the rule.
The rule should be,
you're a guardian.
You're in this neighborhood.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Throughout
this story, I spoke to a number
of people sitting on their
stoops and sitting on their
porches, but none of them
wanted to talk to me on camera.
It wasn't because they felt
that the new police practices
were helping their neighborhood
or hurting.
It was a mixed bag.
It was because they felt
that talking to me would
invite unwanted attention.
Some feared a police they
still didn't fully trust.
And others feared drug
dealers, who may have
left street corners, but
are now behind closed
doors.
TIM GALLAGHER, Social Worker:
There were just dime bags and
needles all over the place.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tim
Gallagher is a social worker
at Guadalupe Family Services.
He works on a block that's
seen tremendous improvement,
but he is still cautious.
TIM GALLAGHER: I think
their Manning concerns
are that it could happen
again, that the good
cops who are here will leave,
and that other cops will replace
them who won't really know
the neighborhood.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Good cops
like Vidal Rivera, who is 6-0 in
the ring, undefeated, but knows
the fight for the streets
of his hometown is
just getting started.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Hari Sreenivasan
in Camden, New Jersey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to the
analysis of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York
Times columnist David Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
David is joining us from
the Rocky Mountains,
Aspen, Colorado.
So, let's start, both of you,
by talking about health care.
Mark, we just heard a little
while ago on the program
Senator Roy Blunt of Missouri
saying it's going to be hard,
he said, to get to 50 votes.
What are you hearing?
MARK SHIELDS: It's an
understatement by Senator Blunt,
a masterpiece of understatement.
Judy, never say never.
I think it's about
time to say never.
I mean, this is not
being put together.
Quite frankly, the motion to
proceed, not to get inside
baseball, but that's when the
majority leader -- means
bringing up a bill.
And I have never seen a motion
to proceed, which is just
asking that the bill be brought
up for debate, fail.
And Mitch McConnell's
reputation as an inside
player has taken a big hit.
But there is not -- there is
not majority on what to do.
And it's not there.
And I will just back to
one Republican has spoken
the absolute abject
truth on this subject.
And he said, "In the 25 years
I have served in the Congress,
Republicans have never, not
one time ever agreed
on a health care plan."
That was Speaker John
Boehner this year.
And I think it remains true.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David,
what are you picking up?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I'm hearing
negative vibes, but not
quite as negative as Mark.
I still think there's a chance.
What you hear is frustration
over, one, it's hard
to take away a benefit
people have already
been given by law.
Two, the Republicans are
more ideologically divided
than they thought they were.
Three, it's very hard to pass
a bill without a White House.
And the president basically
ineffective here, and the
vice president barely more so.
And so they're trying
to do it without him.
And I think what they're
beginning to hear, as
the calls come in, is
that this is a proposal
that hits a lot of
Republicans really hard.
If you're a 60-year-old white
male in Ohio, this can be
devastating to you, both in the
coverage loss and in
the deductibles and the
out-of-pocket expenses,
so the calls are coming
into the offices.
And that's making
people skittish.
I think it's an uphill fight.
I don't think it's quite
as impossible maybe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was
struck, Mark, that Senator
Blunt was saying the
more the senators learn
about what's in here,
the harder it gets.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
Yes.
No, that's absolutely -- and
I would just add to it, Judy,
there is no public argument,
a case to be made for this.
Senator Blunt answered
your specific questions
well, but there is no --
there is not a rallying
cry for, whether it's
preexisting condition
or, you know, that
everybody's child can be
on until the age of 26.
The Obamacare, the
Affordable Care Act, they
could make a public case
for it, that everybody
is in, that rates
will not be higher.
There's none here.
And I think that's
a real problem.
David's point about there
is no political air cover
from the White House.
Quite the opposite.
I mean, the White House
has been a liability.
The president has been
unhelpful, uninformed,
and this morning tweeting,
let's repeal, which,
CBO, the Congressional Budget
Office, has a score on, would
put 26 million people uninsured
immediately, so, you
know, off of insurance.
So, this is not a
recipe for success.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
David, that's right.
I mean, the president did tweet
this morning, well, if they
can't agree, they should repeal
now and replace it later.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, it's the
definition of bad leadership.
He had a more sensible position
not too long ago, which is
you do both things at the same
time.
If you repeal in the
fantasy that you're going
to replace later, when
you can't replace now,
that's just not a realistic
way to make policy.
I think Senator Blunt made
a good point, that, we got
a piece of legislation.
If you can't agree on this,
there's not some mythical future
piece of legislation out there
that's going to pass.
The basic problem is
that this is a bill that
massively redistributes
wealth from the poor
to the rich.
And there are a lot of senators,
including Bob Corker of
Tennessee and Portman of Ohio
and Susan Collins of Maine,
who are just uncomfortable
with the level of upward
redistribution that
this bill entails.
And then there are other
senators on the right,
the Ted Cruzes, who
just want to get rid of
what they call
job-killing taxes.
And that's just a diverse party.
And McConnell is trying super
hard to find some formula
that will please both sides,
but it just may be an
unsolvable problem.
MARK SHIELDS: I will
just add one thing, Judy.
You had an interview earlier
this week with Senator John
Thune of South Dakota, ranking
Republican.
And you asked him about one
little mishap, which was that
Dean Heller, the most vulnerable
Republican incumbent in the
country, up in Nevada next
year, in the only state where
Republicans running for
reelection that Hillary
Clinton carried in
2016, expressed his own
reservations, misgivings,
doubts, opposition to the
bill as proposed last Friday.
And what happened?
Joining the state's governor,
who pointed out that the
rate of uninsured children in
the state had been cut by
one-half under Obamacare because
of the Medicaid extension.
And he back -- he hollered
backed at the governor,
at which point the
president's own political
action committee, staffed
by the president's own
political aides and
apparatchiks, organized
a $1 million, expressed attack
ad series on him, Heller,
which Senator Thune objected
to, that Senator
McConnell opposed.
This is the political equivalent
of coming down from the hills
and shooting the wounded.
And so they had to back off.
And so you talk about White
House-congressional relations.
I mean, this is just -- it's
more than counterproductive.
It's stupid.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're right.
Senator Thune -- David,
Senator Thune's comment,
that wouldn't be a good
time to go after members
of your own party.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Yes.
No, it's -- the relations are
-- it's interesting to watch
even the reactions to the tweets
and everything else.
They can't get
away from this guy.
And what's been interesting,
talking to members of Congress,
is, it would be one thing if
he would just sort of disappear,
but they have to spend so much
of their time just reacting.
And it's just very hard to make
policy, aside from the problem
of just making policy from
Capitol Hill, which is
difficult to start with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, speaking
of the tweets, David, we have
seen some eyebrow-raisers.
We have heard some gasps.
But I guess the president's
tweet yesterday morning about
the "Morning Joe" MSNBC cable
hosts, Joe Scarborough and
Mika Brzezinski, where the
president tweeted very personal
insults, low I.Q.,
face-lift, and so forth, it
seemed to reach a new low.
Do we learn anything new about
this president at this point?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, one of the
nice things, if we can find a
silver lining here, is, it's
possible for everybody
to be freshly appalled,
that we are not inured
to savage, misogynistic
behavior of this sort.
And I saw a lot
of people around.
And I certainly felt in
myself a freshness, a
freshness of outrage.
And I must say, when I hear
Roy Blunt say it's unhelpful
to himself, well, that's true,
but it's more than
unhelpful to Donald Trump
to tweet in this way.
It's morally objectionable.
And I do wish more
senators would say that.
Lindsey Graham and Ben
Sasse have said it, but
a lot of others, oh,
it's just not helpful.
It's more than that.
And the issue here is the
corruption of our public sphere.
And that's what Donald Trump
does with these things.
And it makes it harder for us,
our country, to ever get back
to normal, when these things
are corrosive to just the way
people talk to each other.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Corruption
of the public sphere, Mark.
MARK SHIELDS: I think David
is guilty of understatement.
No, I think he put it very well.
This is hateful
and it's hurtful.
Judy, I don't know what
a parent or a grandparent
is supposed to say to a
10-year-old or a 12-year-old
who said anything comparable to
this and was sent -- banished
to their room or whatever
else for it, I mean, that the
president of the United States
can talk this way, and there
are no consequences.
The irony is that he's more
engaged on the back-and-forth
with Joe Scarborough and Mika
Brzezinski on this than
he has been on health
care or any other issue.
He obviously -- this
is what matters to him.
And it's just that classic
-- not to be sectionally
biased, but it's sort
of a New York bully
approach to life, I mean,
that you say anything,
you do anything, because
the important thing
is winning.
And I just -- you know, I
don't know what else there is
to say, other than you want
to put yourself through a
car wash after you listen to
the president talk this way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are there
consequences, David?
I mean, I heard what you
said about some senators
are just saying, well,
it's not helpful, but
other senators are going
further and saying,
this is really wrong.
But are there ever consequences?
Do we just go on like this?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Well, we will see if
people eventually get
disappointed and get tired.
I do think if it -- one of the
things that may begin to offend
people is potential mafioso
behavior.
One of the things we heard
this morning in the op-ed
piece in The Washington Post by
the two hosts was that the
White House sort of threatened
sort of extortion, that, if
the show becomes more
Trump-friendly, then
a National Enquirer
investigation into their
relationship will be spiked.
And that's sort of mafioso,
extortion behavior.
That's beyond normal
White House behavior.
It's beyond political hardball.
It's sort of using your media
allies, The National Enquirer
and the Trump administration,
to take down enemies.
And that's not something we
have seen in America since
maybe Nixon, or maybe never.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's true,
Mark, we haven't seen
anything like this in a while.
MARK SHIELDS: We haven't.
But I think David's
point about extortion
certainly strengthens
the position of James
Comey, that threats
and extortion or a hint
of extortion is part
of the modus operandi.
To Republicans...
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean,
we should say the White
House is denying it.
MARK SHIELDS: The White
Jared Kushner, I guess, is
denying it, or perhaps somebody
else through him is denying
it.
But the fact that there's
negotiations going back
and forth or communications
on this subject,
you do this and we won't print
an injurious and harmful article
in The National Enquirer,
one of the great
publications of our time.
But, Judy, I remember
when Republicans used
to get upset and angry
at Bill Clinton because
he didn't wear a suit and
tie in the Oval Office.
And Donald Trump, who
is supposed to be this
great deal-maker, I mean,
Joe and Mika Brzezinski
have a morning show which is a
show that watched very much in
this area, but it doesn't have
a great national
audience, and probably 1
percent of the people.
And he just made them a
national -- everybody now
knows about this show.
It's probably increased their
ratings, juiced them up.
So I don't understand
where -- if anything,
it's but counterproductive
in every sense.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it is true,
David, that this is -- it's
hard to find you said there
may be a silver lining in
fresh outrage, but beyond
that, I'm not sure where it is.
DAVID BROOKS: No.
And, you know, the big question
for me is, do we snapback?
Do the norms that used to govern
politics reestablish themselves
after the Trump administration,
or are we here forever?
And I hope, from the
level of outrage, that
we have a snap back.
But the politics is
broken up and down.
And Trump may emerge from a
reality TV world that is much
more powerful than we think.
And there is the prospect
that this is where we are,
which is an horrific thought.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Horrific thought.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, it is that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
David Brooks, we thank you both.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
Often lost in the health care
debate are the individual
stories of fear and
uncertainty that come
with a medical diagnosis.
Elizabeth Silver is
an author and attorney
who was unexpectedly
plunged into a world
of statistics and probability.
She offers her Humble Opinion
on how to consider a prognosis.
ELIZABETH SILVER, Author, "The
Tincture of Time": When my
daughter was six weeks old,
she suffered a serious stroke
and spent two weeks in the
neonatal intensive care unit.
As new parents, my husband
and I spent that time beside
her, waiting for answers and,
at the end, were given very few.
At home, with a single click,
we could watch videos, read
articles, and, most importantly,
stumble across numbers
that would send us either
rejoicing or panicking.
Like many parents, we
had nothing to hold
onto but statistics.
According to one I read, her
stroke carried a 20 percent
chance of death and 90 percent
chance of severe
neurological damage.
I focused on the 90 percent,
and imagined very different
versions of our lives.
Over the next year, as we
weaved in and out of doctors'
offices, I recalled the aphorism
that physicians are
supposed to treat the
patient, not the paper.
Hippocrates, the ancient Greek
philosopher and physician,
said that it is more important
to know what sort of person
has a disease than to know
what sort of disease a person
has.
In other words, we must
remember that patients
are people with stories.
I took a step back and began
looking at these statistics,
these abstract medical studies
and numbers, and started to
view them just as I would
a story, a novel or a film.
After all, a statistic is only
a particular version of a story.
And, as with all
stories, there are always
multiple perspectives
and multiple truths.
You can analyze them
like literature: When
was that statistic taken?
Who was the source group?
Was it self-selecting?
What else do the
subjects have in common?
When looking at a statistic
in a medical study,
you don't have the full
picture of your prognosis,
unless you have every
perspective, every
detail in the story.
And that is something you
will never get from a number.
Three years later, my daughter
escaped all her damning
statistics and is living a full,
happy life, as if
it never happened.
When I look closer at her
story in its totality,
those statistics didn't
differentiate based
on age, my prenatal
care, or even the actual
size of the stroke.
We all know that statistics
are useful, but if we rely on
them with too much weight, this
can only lead to a breakdown
of trust with medicine.
We end up focusing on the 90
percent chance of things going
wrong, and, in the process,
neglect the 10 percent
chance of things going right.
Perhaps my daughter's story
might one day be counted in a
future study, and her success
will serve as a tick
against those frightening,
bigger numbers, because
there is an alternate
ending that includes
the full picture, and
it can be beautiful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Elizabeth Silver.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: We get a jump on the
July 4 holiday with five book
recommendations that explore
America's complex history.
That and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tune in later tonight.
"Washington Week" takes a closer
look at health care reform.
Robert Costa and his
panel explore if there
is a bipartisan solution.
And tomorrow's edition
of "PBS NewsHour Weekend"
takes a look at how
climate change is affecting
working-class Americans.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This is
not after Hurricane Sandy.
This is after what
kind of weather?
JOHN UPTON, Climate Central:
Just yesterday, I was retweeting
some pictures from the street,
Arizona Avenue, Atlantic Avenue,
that were flooding simply
because there was a high tide
associated with a full moon.
At the same time, there was a
storm, so you have tide actually
rising up in the streets
coming through the
storm water drains.
At the same time as that,
you have any rain or even any
rain, and the rain can't drain
away.
So, what you get is
a very substantial
flooding in some of these
neighborhoods that are built
along bays in Atlantic City.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's Saturday
on "NewsHour Weekend."
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and we
will see you soon.